Ronald M. Barcellos (Of the Seventy)
The Lord Looketh on the Heart
When commanded to choose the new king of Israel from among the sons of Jesse, the prophet Samuel, upon looking at Jesse’s oldest son, Eliab, exclaimed with enthusiasm, “Surely the Lord’s anointed is before him.” But Eliab was not the Lord’s chosen servant. The Savior warned Samuel: “Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart.”
While David may not have been physically the strongest or most skilled of his brothers, his heart was strong in the sight of God. He loved God with all his heart and had a deep desire to obey Him. He had unwavering faith in God’s love, power, and promised blessings, as he later demonstrated when he fearlessly fought and defeated Goliath with the Lord’s help.
This story teaches us that all God needs to accomplish His purposes and to help us become who He wants us to become is for each of us to turn our hearts fully to Him. To a lawyer, He commanded, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.” To the Prophet Joseph Smith, He said, “Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind.” And to the Nephites, the resurrected Savior extended this invitation: “Ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit.”
Why is that so? The Savior taught that if our hearts are fully turned to Him, because of His atoning sacrifice we can be blessed with the strength and spiritual gifts we need to overcome our mortal challenges, resist temptation, receive direction and understanding, and feel joy and peace in our lives. “Out of small things proceedeth that which is great.” He said He can “make weak things become strong” and bless us with everything we need to succeed in this mortal life and to receive eternal life. “Blessed are the pure in heart,” He said, “for they shall see God.”
I believe this is why, at least in part, Jesus Christ so often corrected the scribes and Pharisees during His mortal ministry. Though diligent in keeping His law, they did so for the wrong reasons. He rebuked them, saying, “This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me.”
This is a sober reminder to all His disciples that it is not just about what we do—our words and actions—but also why we do what Jesus Christ has asked us to do—our desires and motives. He said, “For I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.” Our Heavenly Father desires more than mechanical acts of obedience and service from His children. He wants us to do those things with real intent because we love Him with all our hearts. He wants us to desire to become like Him.
Now, if the spiritual health of our hearts is a main concern of the Savior—what He looks for in a true disciple—how can we examine our heart and know if it is right in the sight of God?
Recently, as my wife and I returned from our mission in Portugal, we ran a series of health tests to evaluate our physical condition. Some of those tests focused on our hearts’ health—such as blood tests, echocardiograms, and stress tests. I believe the Savior has also provided us with a set of spiritual tests we can use to assess our hearts’ spiritual condition. Let me share a few with you.
“For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also,” Jesus taught. A treasure is something precious to us, something to which we dedicate effort and attention. Where we choose to spend our time and focus our attention, as well as what motivates us to do what we do, says a lot about our hearts. The Savior warned that while many are called by Him, few are chosen “because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and [they] aspire to the honors of men.” Do I make the Savior a priority in my life? Is my eye single to His glory in all that I do?
Throughout scripture, the Lord and His prophets have associated pride and disobedience with having a hardened heart. Nephi exhorted his brothers, saying: “How is it that ye do not keep the commandments of the Lord? How is it that ye will perish, because of the hardness of your hearts?” To the Saints in Missouri, the Lord warned, “But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned.” While the Savior does not expect perfection in keeping His commandments, He does ask that we desire and strive to keep them with all our hearts.
The Lord admonished Oliver Cowdery to “treasure up these words in thy heart.” We’re invited to search the scriptures diligently and, through the power of the Holy Ghost, seek to obtain understanding and a witness of the truthfulness of the gospel in our hearts.
The prophet Abinadi rebuked the priests of the wicked King Noah for not doing that, saying, “Ye have not applied your hearts to understanding; therefore, ye have not been wise.” Am I making a sincere effort to study the scriptures daily and to apply my heart to understand them through prayer?
The Savior taught that “out of the heart proceed evil thoughts” and that “out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.” The quality of our thoughts and words is a good indicator of the purity of our hearts. Am I fostering too many negative thoughts about others’ actions or motives, or even about myself? Am I too quick to judge and condemn others? Do I seek to find excuses or justification for my mistakes? And what about my words? Do they lift and inspire those around me? Or do they often create conflict and resentment?
After my physical tests were completed, my doctor told me that, overall, my heart was healthy—but there were a few concerns that needed to be addressed now, before they became serious. He then prescribed some lifestyle changes. Likewise, as you perform this spiritual assessment of your heart and notice some negative symptoms starting to creep in, please don’t panic! The Savior has provided excellent spiritual medication and treatment to help you. He has even promised to give you a new heart! Here are some actions that can improve your heart’s spiritual strength.
As we dedicate time daily to come closer to Christ, our hearts are changed. Daily study of the scriptures, accompanied by sincere prayer and regular fasting, will increase your love for the Savior and strengthen your faith and desire to repent and humbly yield your heart to God. Consider this example from Nephi: “Wherefore, I did cry unto the Lord; and behold he did visit me, and did soften my heart that I did believe all the words which had been spoken by my father.”
As we continue to nourish the seed of faith by our righteous desires and actions, we will experience the same sanctification of our hearts as the Nephites: “They did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God.”
The Savior taught, “If ye love me, keep my commandments⁠.” He invites us to demonstrate our love by making and keeping covenants with Him. As we strive daily to keep His commandments, sincerely repent from our sins, and persevere in taking His name upon us and aligning our will with His will, we can be blessed with the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost.
Nephi testified, “I know that if ye shall follow the Son, with full purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy and no deception before God, but with real intent, repenting of your sins, witnessing unto the Father that ye are willing to take upon you the name of Christ, by baptism … , then shall ye receive the Holy Ghost.” The Holy Ghost will guide you and help you know the will of the Lord and make good choices.
The Savior invites all to “serve him with all your heart.” When we choose to do each thing the Lord has asked us to do—such as keeping the commandments, partaking of the sacrament, worshipping in the temple, and serving others—with a sincere heart and with real intent, each act of service and worship becomes a powerful spiritual experience that strengthens our faith and testimony and fills our hearts with joy and love for God and our fellow man.
The prophet Alma’s question still echoes today: “Have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?”
Brothers and sisters, I invite you to give your whole heart to the Savior today. Let each act of worship and service be sincere and intentional. Set aside the distractions of the world and strive to have meaningful time for the Lord every day of your lives. Repent and return to Him with all your heart, and He will forgive you and encircle you in the arms of His love. Seek not the things of this world, but choose to have your eye single to His glory and seek the things of a better one. He knows your thoughts and the desires of your heart, and as you come unto Him, He will bless you with strength, confidence, peace, and joy in this life and a place in His celestial kingdom for all eternity.
I know Jesus Christ lives. He is our Redeemer. And He loves you and me with all His heart. In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.
