Quentin L. Cook (Of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles)
The Lord Is Hastening His Work
Charles Dickens famously began his classic novel A Tale of Two Cities with the assertion that “it was the best of times, it was the worst of times.” In a sense, this is true in our day.
We live in a turbulent time when “the whole earth [is] in commotion.” President Russell M. Nelson’s admonition to be peacemakers, as followers of Jesus Christ, was emphasized beautifully this morning by Elder Gary E. Stevenson. This is an essential part of fostering unity, peace, and healing for “the worst of times.”
We also live in “the best of times,” which will be my emphasis. The Lord, in the preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, section 1, declared the fulness of the gospel would “be proclaimed … unto the ends of the world.” The Lord is truly hastening His work in our time. We should be profoundly grateful for the hastening, which has occurred and is occurring despite these challenging times. We live in a day when the Lord’s followers are privileged to hear His voice and respond with open hearts and minds. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, who are committed to the Savior and His commandments, are finding purpose and profound personal peace.
At various times in the history of the Church, there has been a significant increase in those who have entered the covenant path. One such period occurred between 1837 and 1850. Some of the early Apostles in the Lord’s restored Church served missions in the United Kingdom. These missions resulted in thousands joining the Church, and by 1850 there were more members of the Church living in the United Kingdom than in the United States. At that time, the Lord directed these Saints to gather to Utah. A mass emigration occurred, some supported by loans provided through the Perpetual Emigrating Fund.
I love the account of the arrival to the Salt Lake Valley of a large number of converts from England and Wales in 1852. The group was met by the First Presidency at the mouth of Emigration Canyon, accompanied by Captain Pitt’s Band. The Deseret News described them as “a band of pilgrims [including] sisters and children, walking, sunburnt, and weather-beaten, but not forlorn; their hearts were light and buoyant, which was plainly manifest by their happy and joyful countenances.”
As they “passed the Temple Block, … thousands of men, women, and children, gathered, from various parts of the city, to unite in the glorious and joyful welcome.” President Brigham Young addressed them: “May the Lord God of Israel bless you. … We have prayed for you continually; thousands of prayers have been offered up for you, day by day, to Him who has commanded us to gather Israel, save the children of men by the preaching of the gospel, and prepare them for the coming of the Messiah.”
In the spirit of that joyful occasion, let me once again assure all new converts and those returning to the Lord’s Church: We love you; we need you; the Lord needs you. We may not welcome you with marching bands, but we pray the blessings of heaven will attend your efforts to progress along the covenant path that leads to God the Father and Jesus Christ in the celestial kingdom.
There is clear evidence that faith in Jesus Christ is increasing in our day. In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, there has been a remarkable increase in converts and convert participation. In the last 36 months, nearly 900,000 converts have joined the Church. These converts constitute approximately 5 percent of the total Church membership. We welcome new members with open arms and deep appreciation for the path you have chosen.
These 900,000 converts in the last 36 months exceed the total membership of the Church at its 110th anniversary in 1940, which was just over 860,000 members. This was the year Elder Jeffrey R. Holland, Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, and I were born.
These wonderful new converts come from every part of the world. In the first six months of this year, conversions have risen by more than 20 percent over the previous year in Europe, Africa, Asia, the Pacific, and Latin America. In North America we have seen a 17 percent increase. The Lord’s work continues to move forward in powerful ways. These rising numbers are a clear witness that the gospel is touching hearts and changing lives everywhere.
In our day, these precious converts no longer gather to a central location. Because of the faith and consecration of the members of the Church, resources are available to support congregations—with the construction of chapels and temples—across the entire world. With the necessary priesthood keys and the resources provided, saving ordinances are now available in most parts of the world.
Regardless of where we live, current members need to welcome hundreds of thousands of new members as we did the English and Welsh Saints I described from our early history. I loved Elder Gerrit W. Gong’s talk in this session where he taught us that no one should sit alone either emotionally or spiritually.
Our sacred duty is to accept and welcome new and returning members. As the Lord hastens His work, we should love, nurture, and serve those who accept His gospel. We can help build a Zion people, where we are “of one heart and one mind, and [dwell] in righteousness.” To be one with the Lord, we must be one before the Lord. All members, regardless of baptism date, share a responsibility to welcome others.
My counsel to the members of the Church is to wrap our arms around these precious, elect people who have accepted the gospel of Jesus Christ.
President Gordon B. Hinckley taught us that a new convert needs “a friend, a responsibility, and nurturing with ‘the good word of God’ (Moroni 6:4).” We can be among the friends who assure these new converts that they belong and are not just guests. We can help them understand that they are disciples of Jesus Christ who can minister to others and accept callings to serve. Young converts should consider serving a full-time mission. All should be determined to strive to live a Christlike life.
Many join the Church at great personal sacrifice and desperately need the love and support of their fellow Saints.
To those of you who are new or returning to the faith, there are challenges you may face. Be patient with yourself. The missionaries have taught you the essential doctrine and explained the covenants and ordinances of the kingdom, which are set forth in the scriptures and in Preach My Gospel.
Receiving the ordinances and covenants and living the commandments are essential. Focus on the covenants necessary for exaltation. The gospel makes exaltation possible, which requires the making and keeping of sacred covenants with God. Except for baptism, confirmation, and the conferral of the Melchizedek Priesthood for men, the covenants we enter are performed in the temple. For the dead, each of these saving ordinances is performed only in the temple. Accordingly, preparing yourself for the temple should be an immediate goal.
You will at times feel inadequate about what you know. Gospel knowledge is a great blessing obtained incrementally over time, but it is not a saving ordinance. The gospel is not a test of knowledge. However, as President Nelson has promised: “As you prayerfully study the Book of Mormon every day, you will make better decisions—every day. … As you ponder what you study, the windows of heaven will open, and you will receive answers to your own questions and direction for your own life.”
In addition, each year in rotation the Church curriculum in Sunday meetings covers the Old Testament, the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, and the Doctrine and Covenants. Over time you will feel more confident as your gospel knowledge grows. Regular study of the scriptures will bless and enrich your life by deepening your conversion to the gospel of Jesus Christ.
Learning the pure doctrine of Jesus Christ is a lifelong pursuit, both in understanding doctrine and living a Christlike life. Essential covenants provide a framework which we describe as the covenant path. These principles have been powerfully taught by President Nelson. All members, especially new and returning ones, would be blessed by studying and adopting his prophetic messages on covenants and the covenant path.
If you set a goal of worthily receiving each covenant necessary for exaltation, you will be on the path that leads to the celestial kingdom. The temple and the ordinances of the temple should be our focus. Most covenants are available to each individual. One covenant, eternal marriage, involves uniting your efforts with a companion. Our goal should be to find that eternal companion.
However, do not get discouraged if eternal marriage is not possible at this time. Prophets have taught that no blessing will be withheld from faithful members who keep the commandments. One Book of Mormon prophet, King Benjamin, said it beautifully: “Those that keep the commandments of God … are blessed in all things, … and if they [are] faithful to the end … they may dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness.”
You will find, if you have not already, that the members are not perfect. Revealed doctrine makes it clear that in our sojourn here on earth, we will make mistakes. We live in an imperfect and fallen world, not a celestial world. This life is a time of testing, with constant opportunities to repent and prove ourselves.
All of us feel inadequate as we strive to become like Jesus Christ. His Atonement allows us to repent daily as we fall short. As Nephi, another Book of Mormon prophet, said: “[We] must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life.”
As we contemplate the challenges of our day, we must remember that the Savior, during His earthly ministry, also lived in turbulent and violent times. His focus was not on the political challenges of the day; it was on the perfection of the Saints.
Following the Savior and His doctrine and teachings has never been easy in a world that is constantly in commotion. It was not easy for the Savior in the volatile world during His mortal sojourn, it was not easy for our early leaders and members, and it is not easy for us. Fortunately, living prophets provide the guidance we specifically need for our day. President Dallin H. Oaks will continue that spiritually powerful legacy.
I testify that the doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ is eternal and true. I bear my sure and certain witness that Jesus Christ lives and because of His Atonement, we can be one with Him. In the sacred name of Jesus Christ, amen.
