Tracy Y. Browning (Second Counselor in the Primary General Presidency)
Tune Your Heart to Jesus Christ: The Sacred Gift of Primary Music
One of the blessings of my service in Primary is that my heart has learned to love in languages that my tongue does not speak. I have found joy in connecting with fellow Saints through the shared language of sacred music. And especially through the simple songs of Primary, the Holy Spirit has transcended language barriers and filled my heart with His whispering. In children’s voices, the love of God and His Son, Jesus Christ, has been proclaimed in clear, piercing truth.
Although I did not grow up in Primary, the Spirit has quickly taught me the sacredness of its songs, and they have become part of my personal worship. Primary songs have carried a holy influence in my life and have lifted my soul, taught me eternal truths, and drawn me nearer to the Savior and to His gospel.
President Dallin H. Oaks once taught that “the singing of hymns is one of the best ways to learn the doctrine of the restored gospel.” Those words are true for all of us but are especially so for children. Primary music is one of God’s most tender tools for planting the seeds of testimony in the hearts of the Savior’s youngest disciples. Parents, leaders, and teachers give nourishment to that seed as they testify to and invite the testimonies of children of all they are coming to know of Heavenly Father; His Son, Jesus Christ; and the Holy Ghost.
In these last several years of my service, I have spent time singing and learning from Primary music while contemplating a few questions:
How can Primary songs learned in childhood become the spiritual language children use to testify for the rest of their lives?
How does singing gospel truths help children remember the Lord as part of their covenant and prepare them for His ordinances?
And how can Primary songs help write God’s law upon the hearts of these youngest disciples?
When Primary began in 1878, its first president, Aurelia Spencer Rogers, observed that “singing was necessary.” Music has always been at the heart of teaching children the gospel. Primary songs can become a child’s first spiritual language because their simple, memorable melodies give voice to gospel truths. These songs hold the power to stay with children for a lifetime, becoming part of their discipleship and a natural and normal way for them to testify of the Savior.
Primary songs can also be powerful doctrinal teaching tools. Some songs tell the stories of the Savior’s life and ministry. Others teach of His attributes, such as His faith, His hope, and His charity. And the most sacred songs testify of His infinite Atonement and the love that flows from that act of salvation.
A prophet of the Lord, President Russell M. Nelson, taught: “[Music] can exert a continuing influence for good well beyond times when children are small. … [It] has [the] power to provide spiritual nourishment. It has healing power. It has [the] power to facilitate worship; it allows us to contemplate the [Savior’s] Atonement and the Restoration of the gospel with its saving principles and exalting ordinances. Music provides power for us to express prayerful thoughts and bear testimony of sacred truths.”
As parents, leaders, and teachers, our effort includes helping children access these promised blessings by teaching with intention the gospel truths found in the music. President Nelson also taught that “children can learn the doctrine when they’re learning to sing just as much as they can learn the doctrine in a class.” These songs can provide a reservoir of faith-filled sermons that point children to the Savior and help them develop devotion to His gospel.
The scriptures teach that the songs of the righteous that come from the heart are a delight to the Savior. I can only wonder at the delight that the voices of the Savior’s youngest disciples bring. I know their prayerful songs reach heaven as expressions of faith that invite the Holy Spirit to confirm eternal truths and softly and tenderly invite others to accept the call of our Savior to follow Him and come home. As Elder Henry B. Eyring has reminded us, it is in those moments of feeling the Spirit that we have evidence of the Savior’s Atonement working in our lives.
Primary music can be a miracle carried along the lifelong arc of discipleship that our children will travel. A song learned at age six has the power to stay with us—and can return decades later in moments of decision, temptation, grief, or joy. Perhaps in our later years, the lyrics of “I Will Follow God’s Plan” may serve as a spiritual anchor that echoes the witness of the Apostle Paul of the surety of God’s promises to us. Or they may remind us that because God keeps His promises, His covenants offer strong consolation and a place of refuge and invite us to put our hope and assurance steadfastly on Jesus Christ and in His atoning power.
Adult members across the globe, in times of difficulty, often remember and turn to the Primary songs they learned as children. For many, these songs supported the early architecture of their faith in Jesus Christ and were often the first place where conversion to His gospel began. Parents, leaders, and teachers nurtured that faith through the years by teaching, singing, and testifying to children with care.
One sister shared with me that she cherished Primary music, and after 20 years she credits it with accelerating her continued conversion to the gospel of Jesus Christ. Another member testified that Primary planted a mustard seed of faith when he was young and was the reason he was able to come back to the Lord’s Church in his 30s. The Savior promised, “The Comforter … shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance.” Primary music can be one way that promise is fulfilled.
Another beloved Primary song captures the power of simple faith and enduring testimony:
As I walk with Jesus to my home above,
He will bless me with His Spirit and fill me with His love,
Change my heart forever and help me clearly see.
I will walk with Jesus, and He will walk with me.
