Michael Cziesla (Of the Seventy)
Simplicity in Christ
Thirty-three years ago, I received my call to serve as a missionary in the Utah Ogden Mission. Of course, because I was coming from Europe, some local Utah traditions like “green Jell-O with carrots” and “funeral potatoes” were a bit peculiar to me!
However, I was deeply impressed by the devotion and discipleship of many of the Saints, the sheer number of people attending Church meetings, and the scale of fully functioning Church programs. When my mission came to an end, I wanted to make sure that the joy I felt and the spiritual strength and maturity I observed would also be available for my future family. I was determined to return quickly to live my life in the “shadows of the everlasting hills.”
However, the Lord had different plans. On my first Sunday at home, my wise bishop called me to serve as the Young Men president in our ward. Serving this wonderful group of young men, I quickly learned that the joy that comes from being a disciple of Christ has very little to do with the size of Church meetings or the scale of programs.
So when I married my beautiful wife, Margret, we joyfully decided to stay in Europe and raise our family in our home country of Germany. Together we witnessed what President Russell M. Nelson taught many years ago: “The joy we feel has little to do with the circumstances of our lives and everything to do with the focus of our lives.” When the focus of our life is on Christ and His gospel message, we can experience the full blessings of discipleship wherever we live.
However, in a world that is increasingly secular, complex, and confusing, with different and often conflicting messages and demands, how can we avoid our eyes becoming blinded and our hearts becoming hardened and remain focused on the “plain and precious things” of the gospel of Jesus Christ? During a time of confusion, the Apostle Paul gave great advice to the Saints of Corinth by reminding them to focus on “the simplicity that is in Christ.”
The doctrine of Christ and the law of the gospel are so simple that even little children can understand them. We can access the redeeming power of Jesus Christ and receive all the spiritual blessings our Heavenly Father has prepared for us by exercising faith in Jesus Christ, repenting, being baptized, being sanctified through the gift of the Holy Ghost, and enduring to the end. President Nelson described this journey so beautifully as the “covenant path” and the process of becoming a “devout disciple of Jesus Christ.”
If this message is so simple, why does it often feel so challenging to live Christ’s law and follow His example? It may be that we misinterpret simplicity as something that is easy to achieve without effort or diligence. Following Christ requires constant effort and continual change. We need to “[put] off the natural man and … [become like a little] child.” This includes putting our “trust in the Lord” and letting the complexity go, just as little children do. Applying the doctrine of Christ in a simplified and focused way will help us to find joy in our daily lives, give guidance in our callings, answer some of life’s most complex questions, and provide strength to face our greatest challenges.
But how can we practically implement this simplicity in our lifelong journey as disciples of Christ? President Nelson reminded us to focus on “pure truth, pure doctrine, and pure revelation” as we seek to follow the Savior. Regularly asking, “What would the Lord Jesus Christ have me do?” reveals profound direction. Following His example provides a safe path through uncertainty and a loving, guiding hand to hold from day to day. He is the Prince of Peace and the Good Shepherd. He is our Comforter and Deliverer. He is our Rock and Refuge. He is a Friend—your friend and my friend! He invites us all to love God, keep His commandments, and love our neighbor.
As we choose to follow His example and move forward with faith in Christ, embrace the power of His Atonement, and remember our covenants, love fills our hearts, hope and healing raise our spirits, and bitterness and sorrow are replaced by gratitude and the patience to wait for promised blessings. At times, we may need to distance ourselves from an unhealthy situation or seek professional help. But in every case, applying simple gospel principles will help us navigate through life’s challenges in the Lord’s way.
We sometimes underestimate the strength we receive from simple acts like prayer, fasting, scripture study, daily repentance, partaking of the sacrament weekly, and regular worship in the house of the Lord. But when we recognize that we don’t need to “do some great thing” and we center ourselves on applying pure and simple doctrine, we start to see how the gospel “works wonderfully” for us, even in the most challenging circumstances. We find strength and “confidence before God,” even when we experience heartache. Elder M. Russell Ballard has reminded us many times, “It is in that simplicity that [we] will find … peace, joy, and happiness.”
Applying the simplicity that is in Christ makes us prioritize people over processes and eternal relationships over short-term behaviors. We focus on “the things that matter most” in God’s work of salvation and exaltation instead of getting caught up in managing our ministering. We make ourselves free to prioritize the things we can do rather than being weighed down by the things we cannot do. The Lord reminded us: “Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great.” What powerful encouragement to act in simplicity and humility, whatever our circumstances are.
My grandmother Marta Cziesla was a wonderful example of doing “small and simple things” to bring great things to pass. We lovingly called her Oma Cziesla. Oma embraced the gospel in the small village of Selbongen in East Prussia together with my great-grandmother on May 30, 1926.
Marta Cziesla (right) on the day of her baptism.
